wish =

whenever we get into that interactive aws.config vault setup flow

before we run the actual browser auth

we should run `aws sso logout`, to logout  of the selected domain

(ensure its targetted to that domain first though, so that unrelated domains aren't impacted)

---

also, is it possible to show the name of the organization associated to each start url? do we have a name persisted anywhere associated with them? 

e.g., maybe in the config files were we get those start urls? we can expect it to always be declared as $org.$env... on profiles? (or we can see if there's a common prefix across the profiles that use that start url?)


---

                                    
❯ also, is it able to check whether the currently authed sso user IS the user that the auth was requested for? on keyrack    
unlock ?                                                                                                                     
cause it looks like we see cross sso user auth contamination

e.g., need to signinto sso from demo user, but currently in admin user, and everything breaks

i've been running `aws sso logout` to resolve this, but ideally it'd know

❯ yeah, if match or 'not logged in', then proceed. but if logged in and missmatch, logout                                    
                                                                                                                           
❯ and that's only if the SSO user is different                                                                               
                                                                                                                             
❯ cause the same sso user can still be used to successfully sign into different roles

they shouldn't be penalized for test -> prep -> prod progression

but if the sso user themselves changes. e.g., sso username. thats the defect

---

so the unique key is at least

- [sso.domain, role]


but ideally, would check on username expected
